 OA Indicators Explained - NOAA Ocean Acidification Program Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Skip to content Dive into the National Marine Ecosystem Status indicator for ocean acidification Access the OA Indicator Jump to: Marine ecosystems provide food, jobs, security, well-being, and other services to millions of people across the U.S. and they are facing increasingly complex challenges, including ocean acidification. Tracking the status and trends of these ecosystems is critically important to understand how they are changing and identify potential issues. NOAA’s National Marine Ecosystem Status website provides snapshots of major marine and Great Lakes ecosystem indicators, capturing both the status and trends of eight U.S. ecosystem regions and overall national status. The ocean acidification indicator dashboard uses long-term ocean observing data to provide snapshots on ocean chemistry. What is Ocean Acidification? What are the ocean acidification indicators? Indicators are specific, observable data that give us information about the health of an ocean ecosystem. To observe ocean acidification trends, the indicators provide a quantitative picture of ocean chemistry. The NaMES dashboard aggregates publicly available data and is updated annually. One of the most valuable components of this dashboard is the ability to see the trends and variability. The ocean acidification indicator dashboard displays three critical sea surface components at 11 set locations across the seven LMEs. They are partial pressure of carbon dioxide ( p CO 2 ), surface water acidity ( pH ) and aragonite saturation state (Ωar), which is a measure of the availability of an important mineral building block in seawater. The data show how much carbon dioxide is in the upper ocean and over time and trends in ocean acidification. The indicators provide a snapshot of the status of ocean acidification at any point in time as well as the trend over time More About these Measures What is this dashboard and why use it? OAP commits to providing easily-accessible ocean and coastal acidification data people can use. One tool for tracking and monitoring the nation’s seven large marine ecosystems (LMEs) is the National Marine Ecosystem Status website , or NaMES, dashboard. The NaMES dashboard aggregates publicly available data and is updated annually. This dashboard is a great starting point for people who want to know more about the health of our ocean since it provides a snapshot of the health of marine ecosystems, including ocean acidification indicators. Ocean acidification is only one theme of the 24 indicators provided. Each time-series dataset shows seasonal and multi-year changes in a specific region over several decades. Collectively, these data show where ocean chemistry changed fastest from historical values. The NaMES dashboard aggregates publicly available data across 24 themes. Credit: EcoWatch What are the ocean acidification indicators on the NaMES dashboard? Sea Surface p CO 2 The sea surface partial pressure of carbon dioxide, known as p CO 2 , indicates how much dissolved carbon dioxide is present in seawater . When sea surface p CO 2 is less than what is in the atmosphere, seawater tends to take up atmospheric CO 2 like a sponge. When sea surface p CO2 is greater than atmospheric p CO 2 , seawater tends to release CO 2 to the atmosphere. The 2024 global average atmospheric p CO2 was 422.7 ppm (NOAA) and the ocean is in near equilibrium. Sea Surface pH Sea surface pH measures the acidity of seawater. We measure pH on a scale of 0-14, with values above 7 commonly called “basic” and values below 7 called “acidic”. A shift in pH to a lower value reflects an increase in acidity. Changes in the amount of dissolved carbon dioxide in seawater alter its pH. In turn, pH is a logarithmic scale so small changes in pH mean big changes in acidity. While the ocean itself is not acidic with a pH typically near 8, small decreases in pH can affect marine life. A primer on pH Sea Surface Ωar Aragonite is a calcium carbonate mineral and a building block for shells and skeletons of some marine life like shellfish, some plankton, corals and hard parts of other marine life. Sea surface Ωar, or “omega-aragonite”, indicates how suitable conditions are for this mineral to form or dissolve. When Ωar is above 1, aragonite can form or stay intact. When Ωar is below 1, aragonite will dissolve and become less available for building shells and skeletons. Species have different thresholds for how saturated these minerals need to be before posing biological challenges. The "Big Four" OA Measurements How do we measure OA? How to use this dashboard The NaMES dashboard has two resources we recommend using to learn more including a “ How to use this website ” resource and a brief video tour of the dashboard. Click on the indicator plots for a short description of the time series, a plain language description of the indicator and the data source. Note the video mentions gauge plots that are not visible for the ocean acidification dashboard for clarity. Reading the graphs The time series plots describe and show the changes in each indicator over time and show at least 10 years of data. Each plot includes horizontal lines that indicate the median (middle) value of that indicator, as well as the 10th and 90th percentiles calculated for the entire timeline. This indicates the range where most measurements fall on the scale. The two symbols located to the right of each plot describe how recent values (within the last five years) of an indicator compare against the longer timeline. An example time series for Gulf of America pCO 2 as of December 2025 with data for 1998 to 2024. In this example, these symbols indicate that pCO 2 has been above the high range of historical values (black circle with the plus sign) and a recent increasing trend (upward arrow). Credit: EcoWatch A black circle shows if the indicator's average value over the last five years is: Above the high range of historical values (90th percentile) ( plus sign ). Below the low range of historical values (10th percentile) ( minus sign ). Within the usual range of historical values (between the 10th and 90th percentiles) ( solid circle ). The arrow shows the trend of the indicator over the last five years (2019-2024). An upward arrow indicates a recent increase in the measure greater than one standard deviation. This means that the measure is likely to indicate a recent upward trend that deviates from the average. A downward arrow indicates shows a recent decrease in the measure greater than one standard deviation. This means that the measure is likely to indicate a recent downward trend that deviates from the average. A left-right arrow means that there was no change or any recent change less than one standard deviation. There’s also a no-arrow option which indicates no significant trend. What are the limitations of these indicators? Each of the three ocean acidification indicators are at the sea surface. Sea surface data are helpful to understand atmosphere-ocean interactions and the environment of some surface-dwelling species. However, they do not shed much light on the conditions deeper in the ocean including mid-water or on the seafloor where so many ecologically, culturally, and economically important species live. Deeper waters usually contain more dissolved carbon dioxide (higher p CO 2 ) and have a lower pH (more acidic) and omega aragonite (relatively mineral deficient). These three ocean acidification indicators are data collected through SOCAT , where measurements are taken from ships transiting across the ocean. While they enhance our data coverage over space and time, they do not include fixed stations that measure continuously and may not reflect all the variation that occurs at specific locations. Conversely, they have the advantage of potentially measuring conditions experienced by mobile marine species over their lifetime or even over a particular key period like reproductive or metamorphosis stages. What are common trends in OA? The NOAA dashboard confirms that while the severity varies, each region has at least one indicator showing increasing acidification. All monitored regions are tracked using the same three critical chemical metrics, giving a consistent view of the problem across the country. Active Trend: Regions showing a significant increasing trend in p CO 2 (e.g., Aleutian Islands and Gulf of America) have clear and actively worsening acidification. Here, all three of the indicators consistently move in the direction of increased acidity (i.e. p CO 2 up, pH down, Ωar down). Historically Acidified Status: Many regions (e.g., Gulf of Alaska, Northeast U.S., Southeast U.S.) show no significant recent trend in their p CO 2 . However, the current levels of p CO 2 are high and pH and/or aragonite saturation are historically low . This likely means the conditions are currently stable, but they have already shifted into a persistent, more acidified state. Other general trends The rate and magnitude of recent change are highly region-specific . This variation is often due to local influences like freshwater input, upwelling events, and ocean circulation. Colder water in high latitudes tends to have relatively large seasonal variability in p CO 2 , pH, and aragonite saturation due to the strong seasonal changes in temperature and circulation that occur in these regions. Warm, low-latitude water tends to have relatively small seasonal variability in these measurements, making gradual changes in the baseline visible sooner. Additional variations can be caused by biological differences. Some examples are large phytoplankton or coccolithophore blooms occurring in different years or sites, or circulation changes like the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO). Upwelling areas like the California Current have seasonal upwelling that brings colder, more acidified water accompanied with high nutrients and lower oxygen. Upwelling both fuels natural phytoplankton blooms supporting marine ecosystems, but can also stress some marine life. Recent upwelling periods are starting earlier, happening more often, and lasting longer than they have historically; this exposes marine life to acidified, low oxygen waters more than in the past. Upwelling brings colder, more acidified water accompanied with high nutrients and lower oxygen. Credit: NOAA NOS What are the trends in my region? Map of Large Marine Ecosystems (LMEs) There are seven large marine ecosystems across the United States and 11 locations with ocean acidification indicators with multiple locations in Alaska. Ocean Acidification indicators for your region Aleutian Islands, Alaska pH – between 10th and 90th percentile, recent downward trend p CO 2 – above 90th percentile, recent upward trend Ωar – below 10th percentile, recent downward trend Strong Recent Acidification Trend: This region shows a clear, significant upward trend in p CO 2 meaning the ocean is currently absorbing CO 2 faster than in the past. This rapid absorption mirrors a parallel decrease in pH (increasing acidity) and a drop in aragonite saturation , posing an increasing challenge for local marine life that build calcium carbonate shells and skeletons. All indicators for Alaska Gulf of Alaska pH – below 10th percentile, no trend information provided p CO 2 – above 90th percentile, no trend information provided Ωar – between 10th and 90th percentile, recent downward trend Elevated acidification, Stable Recent Trend: While p CO 2 has not shown a significant recent trend, the values remain historically above normal, and pH values are concurrently below normal. This indicates increased acidity. The stability of the measures over the last five years is a mixed signal (Ωar shows a recent downward trend), but the underlying state remains more acidified, presenting a persistent challenge to sensitive ecosystems. All indicators for Alaska California Current pH – below 10th percentile, recent downward trend p CO 2 – above 90th percentile, recent upward trend Ωar – between 10th and 90th percentile, recent downward trend Regionally Exacerbated Acidification: As a region characterized by strong seasonal upwelling, this region is known for periods of intense acidification. When p CO 2 levels are high, both pH and aragonite saturation are pushed into critically low ranges , which can directly impact plankton and economically important shellfish along the West Coast. All indicators for the California Current Caribbean pH – within 10th and 90th percentile, no trend p CO 2 – within 10th and 90th percentile, recent upward trend Ωar – within 10th and 90th percentile, recent downward trend Ongoing Coral Reef Stress: While long-term trends confirm overall acidification, the data in this region vary. When p CO 2 is elevated, the primary consequence is a reduction in aragonite saturation seen in the recent upward trend in p CO 2 and recent downward trend in Ωar, respectively. Since aragonite is the mineral used by coral reefs to grow and repair themselves, this low saturation state indicates increased stress on the foundation of this marine ecosystem. All indicators for the Caribbean Gulf of America pH – below 10th percentile, recent downward trend p CO 2 – above 90th percentile, recent upward trend Ωar – below 10th percentile, recent downward trend Significant Acidification Trend: The Gulf of America shows a clear and significant increasing trend in p CO 2 , placing recent measurements at the upper end of the historical range, along with ongoing decrease in pH and decrease in aragonite availability . This strong, consistent signal across all three ocean acidification measures confirms the region’s acidification is increasing. All indicators for the Gulf of America Hawai‘i & Pacific Islands pH – below 10th percentile, no trend p CO 2 – above 90th percentile, recent upward trend Ωar – below 10th percentile, no trend Stable Low pH: The pH in this open ocean-dominated region shows no significant recent trend , but remains consistently at the low end of its historical range. However, the p CO 2 shows a recent upward trend and remains at the high end of the range of historical values. This region’s chemistry is less affected by coastal influences. The stability across pH and Ωar indicators points to a slow, steady change driven by the increase in global absorption of atmospheric p CO 2 . All indicators for Hawai'i - Pacific Islands Northeast U.S. pH – below 10th percentile, no trend p CO 2 – above 90th percentile, recent upward trend Ωar – within 10th and 90th percentiles Acidic Status, Mixed Stability: Recent p CO 2 levels were consistently above historical averages, whereas pH has been consistently below . This indicates that seawater is currently more acidic than in the past. However, p CO 2 , pH and Ωar measures over the last five years show no significant trend , suggesting there is stability in the rate of change over the last five years, even as the overall status remains highly acidified. All indicators for the Northeast Southeast U.S. pH – below 10th percentile, no trend p CO 2 – above 90th percentile, recent upward trend Ωar – below 10th percentile, recent downward trend Acidic Status, no significant trend in pH: The pH shows no significant recent trend despite increasing p CO 2 . However, pH consistently reports below historical averages over this five year period. While the rate of acidification has been stable over the last five years, the region is experiencing increased acidity. This is consistent with high and increasing p CO 2 and low and decreasing Ωar relative to longer-term monitoring. All indicators for the Southeast This is only a subset of the areas with ocean acidification indicators. Want to know more about the other areas and/or other indicators? Explore all the regional indicators including indicators for the Great Lakes . What are sources of variation? This dashboard shows how much more there is to the ocean acidification story than the global average ocean acidification numbers that are commonly reported. Geographic or seasonal variations may help explain why ocean acidification impacts certain ecosystems or species differently. Physical and biological processes can cause changes in these indicators on local to regional scales. For example, temperature, windspeed, relative amounts of CO 2 in the atmosphere and ocean, and watermass circulation can change p CO 2 , pH, and omega aragonite. Also, photosynthesis by marine plants, from tiny single-celled plankton to enormous macroalgae removes CO 2 from the ocean, lowering p CO 2 and raising pH. Respiration by any large collection of creatures from bacteria to marine mammals will measurably add CO 2 to the ocean. Repeated seasonal cycles in the data come from the combined action of temperature, water circulation, and biological activity, hence the similar patterns observed across multiple regions. Bioeconomic modeling to inform Alaska fisheries management Image credit: Allen Shimada, NOAA NMFS Bioeconomic models are a multidisciplinary tool that use oceanography, fisheries science and social science to assess socioeconomic impacts. Funded by the Ocean Acidification Program, researchers at the Alaska Fisheries Science Center use a bioeconomic model to study the impacts of ocean acidification on Eastern Bering Sea crab, northern rock sole and Alaska cod. The goal is to predict how ocean acidification will affect abundance yields and income generated by the fisheries. This work informs the potential economic impacts of ocean acidification and future decision making and research planning. More about this work Effects of ocean acidification and temperature on Alaskan crabs Image credit: David Csepp, NMFS AKFSC ABL Long-term declines of red king crab in Bristol Bay, Alaska may be partially attributed to ocean acidification conditions. These impacts may be partially responsible for the fishery closures during the 2021–2022 and 2022–2023 seasons. Researchers found that ocean acidification negatively impacts Alaskan crabs generally by changing physiological processes, decreasing growth, increasing death rates and reducing shell thickness. Funded by the Ocean Acidification Program, scientists at the Alaska Fisheries Science Center continue to investigate the responses of early life history stages and study the potential of various Alaska crabs to acclimate to changing conditions. Results will inform models that will use the parameters studied to predict the effects of future ocean acidification on the populations of red king crab in Bristol Bay as well as on the fisheries that depend on them. Fishery managers will better be able to anticipate and manage stocks if changing ocean chemistry affects stock productivity and thus the maximum sustainable yield. More about this work Forecasts for Alaska Fisheries Image credit: Michael Theberge Understanding seasonal changes in ocean acidification in Alaskan waters and the potential impacts to the multi-billion-dollar fishery sector is a main priority. Through work funded by NOAA’s Ocean Acidification Program, the Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory developed a model capable of depicting past ocean chemistry conditions for the Bering Sea and is now testing the ability of this model to forecast future conditions. This model is being used to develop an ocean acidification indicator provided to fisheries managers in the annual NOAA Eastern Bering Sea Ecosystem Status Report . ADAPTING TO OCEAN ACIDIFICATION The NOAA Ocean Acidification Program (OAP) works to prepare society to adapt to the consequences of ocean acidification and conserve marine ecosystems as acidification occurs. Learn more about the human connections and adaptation strategies from these efforts. Adaptation approaches fostered by the OAP include: FORECASTING Using models and research to understand the sensitivity of organisms and ecosystems to ocean acidification to make predictions about the future, allowing communities and industries to prepare MANAGEMENT Using these models and predictions as tools to facilitate management strategies that will protect marine resources and communities from future changes TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT Developing innovative tools to help monitor ocean acidification and mitigate changing ocean chemistry locally REDUCING OUR CARBON FOOTPRINT 50 more ways to reduce your carbon footprint > On the Road Drive fuel-efficient vehicles or choose public transportation. Choose your bike or walk! Don't sit idle for more than 30 seconds. Keep your tires properly inflated. With your Food Choices Eat local- this helps cut down on production and transport! Reduce your meat and dairy. Compost to avoid food waste ending up in the landfill With your Food Choices Make energy-efficient choices for your appliances and lighting. Heat and cool efficiently! Change your air filters and program your thermostat, seal and insulate your home, and support clean energy sources By Reducing Coastal Acidification Reduce your use of fertilizers, Improve sewage treatment and run off, and Protect and restore coastal habitats TAKE ACTION WITH YOUR COMMUNITY You've taken the first step to learn more about ocean acidification - why not spread this knowledge to your community? Every community has their unique culture, economy and ecology and what’s at stake from ocean acidification may be different depending on where you live. As a community member, you can take a larger role in educating the public about ocean acidification. Creating awareness is the first step to taking action. As communities gain traction, neighboring regions that share marine resources can build larger coalitions to address ocean acidification. Here are some ideas to get started: Work with informal educators, such as aquarium outreach programs and local non-profits, to teach the public about ocean acidification. Visit our Education & Outreach page to find the newest tools! Participate in habitat restoration efforts to restore habitats that help mitigate the effects of coastal acidification Facilitate conversations with local businesses that might be affected by ocean acidification, building a plan for the future. Partner with local community efforts to mitigate the driver behind ocean acidification – excess CO2 – such as community supported agriculture, bike & car shares and other public transportation options. Contact your regional Coastal Acidification Network (CAN) to learn how OA is affecting your region and more ideas about how you can get involved in your community More for Taking Community Action 