 What is Ocean Acidification - NOAA Ocean Acidification Program Official websites use .gov A .gov website belongs to an official government organization in the United States. Secure .gov websites use HTTPS A lock ( ) or https:// means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites. Skip to content Our Changing Ocean What is Ocean Acidification? Our ocean’s chemistry is changing, causing impacts to marine life and livelihoods. Overview Monitoring “The Big Four” Coastal Acidification Freshwater Acidification What we can do Communicating Ocean Acidification Ocean acidification occurs when the ocean absorbs carbon dioxide. This causes a fundamental and global change in the chemistry of the ocean. The Ocean is a Great Carbon Sponge A Timeline of Evidence Seawater Chemistry Bicarbonate as a Buffer The Ocean is a Great Carbon Sponge The ocean is a great sponge for carbon dioxide. When our ocean absorbs this carbon dioxide, it changes the chemistry of the ocean. While the ocean itself is not acidic, the absorption of carbon dioxide increases the ocean’s acidity. This can impact some marine life and the people who depend on them. AI-Generated image by Canva A Timeline of Evidence Air and ocean observing provides critical information for understanding how carbon changes in the air and sea, and in turn how acidity tracks carbon in our ocean. Over the past 250 years, the ocean has become about 26% more acidic on average globally. Ocean acidification (OA) refers to a change in ocean chemistry in response to the uptake of increasing carbon dioxide (CO 2 ). Ocean CO2 rises with increasing atmospheric CO2. In turn, the pH of the ocean declines, reflecting increased acidity. Credit: NOAA Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory Carbon Group Seawater chemistry Increases in carbon dioxide (known as CO 2 ) in the atmosphere drive corresponding increases in dissolved CO 2 within the surface waters of our ocean. This dissolved CO 2 reacts with seawater to form carbonic acid (H 2 CO 3 ). Carbonic acid breaks apart to form bicarbonate ions (HCO 3 – ) and hydrogen ions (H + ). Hydrogen ions (H + ) act like free agents that cause the seawater to become more acidic. We measure this using pH (H represents hydrogen ions). The free agent hydrogen ions also react with carbonate ions (CO 3 2- ) to form bicarbonate (HCO 3 – ), making carbonate ions relatively less abundant. Next, find out why this matters next. Basic chemistry of ocean acidification and it's effects on shelled organism. Credit: NOAA Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory Bicarbonate as a Buffer This is how carbonate ions help to buffer seawater against large changes in pH by reacting with some of the excess hydrogen ions and forming bicarbonate. However, carbonate ions (CO 3 2- ) are an important part of calcium carbonate (CaCO 3 ). Image Credit: NOAA AFSC Monitoring "the Big four" There are four ocean chemistry parameters we measure to understand ocean chemistry related to acidification. Researchers need to measure two of these parameters to be able to calculate the others and characterize conditions. Learn about what we measure, and why. Download the infographic for even more. pH When the ocean absorbs carbon dioxide, chemical reactions create hydrogen ions that act like free agents, able to react with other compounds. Two ways we track ocean acidification are through pH and total alkalinity (TA). pH is a measure of how many free hydrogen ions are in the seawater. The more carbon dioxide in the ocean, the more these free agents are created, causing lower pH (more acidic). pCO2 The partial pressure of CO 2 (pCO 2 ) tells us how much carbon dioxide is in seawater. This information helps us understand ocean carbonate chemistry and biological productivity in the region. pCO 2 increases when the ocean absorbs more CO 2 from the atmosphere with elevated emissions. TA Alkalinity is the ocean’s buffering system against increasing acidity. Total alkalinity is a measure of the concentration of buffering molecules like carbonate and bicarbonate in the seawater that can neutralize acid. DIC Dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) tells us how much non-biological carbon is in seawater. Inorganic carbon comes in three main forms that we measure for DIC: carbon dioxide ( CO 2 ), bicarbonate (HCO 3 - ), and carbonate (CO 3 2- ). Understanding DIC can help us determine the balance of carbonate forms in the ocean and the likelihood of ocean acidification. Coastal Acidification Local coastal processes can cause acidification. Coastal acidification occurs from local processes that affect water chemistry. They have local effects and can threaten coastal ecosystems and communities. Monitoring and modeling conditions in coastal zones is critical for tracking and predicting coastal acidification. Minimizing other local stresses can help ecosystems and people manage the challenges of coastal acidification better. Science-based management of coastal ecosystems can help support fisheries and coastal economies and cultures. Coastal acidification includes local changes in water chemistry that can arise from human inputs on land as well as natural processes. Coastal upwelling is a natural process that brings deeper, more acidic waters to the surface ocean in the coastal zone. Upwelling occurs primarily on the western boundaries of continents, but the timing, duration and severity of upwelling events may increase with climate change. Human impacts include excess nutrient run-off (e.g. nitrogen and organic carbon) from land. This runoff can cause increases in algal growth, commonly known as ‘blooms’. When these algal blooms die, they consume oxygen and release carbon dioxide and increasing acidity. Coastal acidification can also occur with changes in water column circulation occur. Changes in wind, temperature, or salinity changes can have both natural and human causes. The impacts of ocean acidification depend on the timing, duration, and severity of acidification, how marine life and ecosystems respond, and the effects on people who depend on healthy coastal ecosystems. Freshwater Acidification Aqua MODIS images courtesy Jeff Schmaltz, LANCE/EOSDIS MODIS Rapid Response Team at NASA GSFC. Caption by Kathryn Hansen. Freshwater bodies like the Great Lakes also experience acidification. Researchers project that pH, the measure of how acidic or alkaline the water body is, will decline at a rate similar to that of the oceans in response to increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide. Absorption of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere isn’t the only source of acidification. The Great Lakes are also recovering from acid deposition. The Midwestern and Northeastern United States experienced an increase in deposition of sulfuric and nitric acids from the early 20th century until air-quality regulations mitigated this trend. Present-day mean pH and alkalinity vary according to the geology of each lake basin, with Superior having the most acidified waters and Michigan the least acidified. In addition, considerable short-term spatial and temporal variability in pH occurs, driven largely by varying rates of photosynthesis, respiration, and seasonal mixing. There has not been any long-term robust monitoring of acidification in the Great Lakes system until recently. Ocean Acidification Solutions Engage Your Community What’s at stake from ocean acidification may be different depending on where you live. As a community member, you can take a larger role in educating the public about ocean acidification. Share what you know - this is an action everyone can take. Join your regional coastal acidification network Participate in community science for directly monitoring ocean chemistry or other activities that reduce other stressors to our marine ecosystems. Help restore or protect important marine ecosystems that we rely on for food, safety and the blue economy. Use Your Tools The NOAA Ocean Acidification Program aims to provide information to help people adapt to the consequences of ocean acidification. Check out our near real-time data and support tools that include: Maps and visualization tools to explore ocean chemistry in your area Forecasts, hindcasts, and nowcasts that help you assess what's happening and what is coming Multimedia resources to better understand changing ocean chemistry and share with others Build Adaptive Capacity NOAA works to better understand how to mitigate and adapt to acidification on local, regional and national scales. Continued research that uses innovative technologies and approaches provides better information faster. Facilitate technological innovation for sustaining world-class ocean observing and research Integrating community needs and challenges to direct effective efforts Foundational research for emerging solutions such as marine carbon dioxide removal Communicating Ocean Acidification Communicating Effectively Communicating Effectively After more than a decade of sharing about ocean acidification science, we’ve learned what resonates with people when introduced to this complex topic and what leads to misconceptions. Using best practices for education and communication based on social science and cognitive science leads to a more comprehensive and accurate understanding of ocean acidification. OAP provides and shares resources, activities and programming that support these efforts so that people can make the best informed decisions. Underwater ocean rays. Image Credit: Adobe Stock, Katatonia Communicating Complexity Communicating Complexity Ocean and coastal acidification are complex topics. It is important to connect the dots for your audience by effectively sharing how ocean acidification occurs, what happens and its consequences and what is being done to help people prepare and adapt. First, the ocean absorbs carbon dioxide like a sponge and this changes ocean chemistry. One consequence of changing ocean chemistry is that our ocean is increasing in acidity. Small changes can have big consequences for some marine life and people depending on them. We see those impacts now. AI-Generated image by Canva Ocean acidification impacts on marine life Ocean acidification impacts marine life Ocean acidification is an energy problem – some marine life spend more energy getting the mineral building blocks they need to build and maintain their shells and skeletons. Energy that could be used for growth, avoiding predators, feeding and reproducing. More about Impacts Image Credit: David Burdick Ocean acidification impacts on people Ocean acidification impacts people Ocean acidification threatens food security, economies, and ways of life because of its potential impacts on coastal ecosystems and societies. Practical, common sense steps now can ensure the future of healthy marine ecosystems upon which we rely. How people adapt Oyster grower in Samish Bay next to lines of raised Pacific Oysters on a sunny day. Credit: Puget Sound Partnership A common misconception A common misconception One common misconception the community is working to clarify is the difference between climate change and ocean acidification, because although carbon dioxide is the source behind both of these changes, they are distinct. How people adapt Image credit: NOAA PMEL How ocean acidification differs from climate change How ocean acidification differs from climate change Climate change drives changes in our atmosphere that can then cause changes in our ocean such as warming temperatures, while ocean and coastal acidification are is directly caused by an increase in carbon dioxide in our atmosphere and from other sources. It is the changing ocean chemistry that results from the ocean absorbing carbon like a sponge. Image Credit: Modified from A mapped dataset of surface ocean acidification indicators in large marine ecosystems of the United States, Scientific Data Communicating Coastal Acidification Communicating Coastal Acidification Coastal acidification represents a significant environmental change associated with nutrient runoff from land, or eutrophication. This coastal acidification animation is intended to support teachers who are educating students about the causes and effects of ocean acidification and want to shift their students’ learning from a global problem to a coastal water quality issue. Launch Module This animation is featured as part of the NOAA Data in the Classroom Ocean and Coastal Acidification Module and is integrated directly into the online Story Map activities. To find it, go Level 3 of the activity. The animation, and a choices game, can be accessed from the Teacher Guide tab and is available for teachers to use as an extension activity. Addressing Ocean Acidification The OAP works closely with coastal state governments, on-the-ground networks, impacted industries, and NGOs to develop their responses to ocean acidification. See how we take action by supporting legislation development and reporting for ocean acidification research. Legislation & Reporting Bioeconomic modeling to inform Alaska fisheries management Image credit: Allen Shimada, NOAA NMFS Bioeconomic models are a multidisciplinary tool that use oceanography, fisheries science and social science to assess socioeconomic impacts. Funded by the Ocean Acidification Program, researchers at the Alaska Fisheries Science Center use a bioeconomic model to study the impacts of ocean acidification on Eastern Bering Sea crab, northern rock sole and Alaska cod. The goal is to predict how ocean acidification will affect abundance yields and income generated by the fisheries. This work informs the potential economic impacts of ocean acidification and future decision making and research planning. More about this work Effects of ocean acidification and temperature on Alaskan crabs Image credit: David Csepp, NMFS AKFSC ABL Long-term declines of red king crab in Bristol Bay, Alaska may be partially attributed to ocean acidification conditions. These impacts may be partially responsible for the fishery closures during the 2021–2022 and 2022–2023 seasons. Researchers found that ocean acidification negatively impacts Alaskan crabs generally by changing physiological processes, decreasing growth, increasing death rates and reducing shell thickness. Funded by the Ocean Acidification Program, scientists at the Alaska Fisheries Science Center continue to investigate the responses of early life history stages and study the potential of various Alaska crabs to acclimate to changing conditions. Results will inform models that will use the parameters studied to predict the effects of future ocean acidification on the populations of red king crab in Bristol Bay as well as on the fisheries that depend on them. Fishery managers will better be able to anticipate and manage stocks if changing ocean chemistry affects stock productivity and thus the maximum sustainable yield. More about this work Forecasts for Alaska Fisheries Image credit: Michael Theberge Understanding seasonal changes in ocean acidification in Alaskan waters and the potential impacts to the multi-billion-dollar fishery sector is a main priority. Through work funded by NOAA’s Ocean Acidification Program, the Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory developed a model capable of depicting past ocean chemistry conditions for the Bering Sea and is now testing the ability of this model to forecast future conditions. This model is being used to develop an ocean acidification indicator provided to fisheries managers in the annual NOAA Eastern Bering Sea Ecosystem Status Report . ADAPTING TO OCEAN ACIDIFICATION The NOAA Ocean Acidification Program (OAP) works to prepare society to adapt to the consequences of ocean acidification and conserve marine ecosystems as acidification occurs. Learn more about the human connections and adaptation strategies from these efforts. Adaptation approaches fostered by the OAP include: FORECASTING Using models and research to understand the sensitivity of organisms and ecosystems to ocean acidification to make predictions about the future, allowing communities and industries to prepare MANAGEMENT Using these models and predictions as tools to facilitate management strategies that will protect marine resources and communities from future changes TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT Developing innovative tools to help monitor ocean acidification and mitigate changing ocean chemistry locally REDUCING OUR CARBON FOOTPRINT 50 more ways to reduce your carbon footprint > On the Road Drive fuel-efficient vehicles or choose public transportation. Choose your bike or walk! Don't sit idle for more than 30 seconds. Keep your tires properly inflated. With your Food Choices Eat local- this helps cut down on production and transport! Reduce your meat and dairy. Compost to avoid food waste ending up in the landfill With your Food Choices Make energy-efficient choices for your appliances and lighting. Heat and cool efficiently! Change your air filters and program your thermostat, seal and insulate your home, and support clean energy sources By Reducing Coastal Acidification Reduce your use of fertilizers, Improve sewage treatment and run off, and Protect and restore coastal habitats TAKE ACTION WITH YOUR COMMUNITY You've taken the first step to learn more about ocean acidification - why not spread this knowledge to your community? Every community has their unique culture, economy and ecology and what’s at stake from ocean acidification may be different depending on where you live. As a community member, you can take a larger role in educating the public about ocean acidification. Creating awareness is the first step to taking action. As communities gain traction, neighboring regions that share marine resources can build larger coalitions to address ocean acidification. Here are some ideas to get started: Work with informal educators, such as aquarium outreach programs and local non-profits, to teach the public about ocean acidification. Visit our Education & Outreach page to find the newest tools! Participate in habitat restoration efforts to restore habitats that help mitigate the effects of coastal acidification Facilitate conversations with local businesses that might be affected by ocean acidification, building a plan for the future. Partner with local community efforts to mitigate the driver behind ocean acidification – excess CO2 – such as community supported agriculture, bike & car shares and other public transportation options. Contact your regional Coastal Acidification Network (CAN) to learn how OA is affecting your region and more ideas about how you can get involved in your community More for Taking Community Action 